---
title: "Why Do Anything?"
date: 2023-12-14T15:54:23-07:00
draft: false
---

As a creative person, there's a question that I've often grappled with.  Simply
stated, the question is this: why do anything?  Posed completely on its own, it
might not be clear what anyone could be getting at by asking such a question.
So let's describe how a person might come to ask something like this.

Pursuing any kind of creative endeavour can be emotionally challenging.  One of
the most common struggles that comes up is in trying to convince oneself that
whatever you have to say is important.  We live in an age of informational
abundance.  That includes reputational information.  The pantheon of famous
people is always in plain view.  It's easy to feel insignificant by comparison.  

Likewise, every field has its own roster of giants.  European classical music
has Bach and Beethoven and Mozart; or Copland and Stravinsky, to give slightly
more contemporary examples (am I giving away my taste here?).  Mathematics has
Gauss, Euler, Riemann, Cantor, and so on.  And, to get a bit more niche,
classical guitar has John Williams, Ana Vidovic, Julian Bream, Scott Tenant,
Andrew York, Xue Fei Yang etc. 

Let's pause on the topic of classical guitar.  I've been playing the instrument
for a number of years.  I went to university to study it.  But I've continued
to struggle to find motivation to play regularly.  Today, a glacier of
sentiment on this topic finally calved in my mind.

It occurred to me that my reluctance to play had something to do with my
tendency to compare myself to the great players of the instrument.  And then a
second realization came to me.  I realized that I had not taken the years long
journey of learning to play classical guitar because I thought I could be as
good as any of those players.  Not in the slightest.  Whenever I made any
progress on the instrument, it was always driven by the enjoyment of the music
and of the feeling of achieving a certain quality of sound.

Those who have gone some distance learning an instrument may know what I'm
talking about.  The feeling of setting goals (whether loose or rigid) and
achieving them, of seeing something that felt difficult become easy, of putting
the time in and hearing the reward of a song faithfully rendered; it's the
feeling of real life.  When you feel so connected to something, you feel as
though it is the reason you were given a life to live.

Sometimes, I'll practice for hours.  It can start awkwardly, but then comes a
moment when it feels like anything is possible.  All the technical problems
that you normally struggle with fall into the background.  You feel all the
movements before they happen and *know* that they will happen as you imagine.
Nothing separates you from the instrument.  Your mind has been filled with
music.

And then, you have your answer as to the question: why do anything?  Do
something simply to have it fill your mind.  It doesn't matter how much better
or worse you do it compared to the next person.  Do it because it gives you the
feeling of unity.

This idea applies to anything.  If you can't find the enjoyment and wonder in
an activity, it will be hard to learn much from it.  Granted, our modern world
doesn't often give people the time to find much enjoyment in things.  So then
it can be a mantra until the opportunity presents itself: *find the enjoyment*.
